docs/user-guide/04-aspnet-core.md, before:

# Lesson 4: ASP.NET Core

In this lesson, you'll learn to integrate Traceability with ASP.NET Core (.NET 8).

## Basic Configuration

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
using Traceability.Extensions;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

**What happens automatically:**
- ✅ Middleware is automatically registered via `IStartupFilter`
- ✅ HttpClient is automatically configured with `CorrelationIdHandler`
- ✅ Correlation-id is automatically generated for each request

## Using in a Controller

**ValuesController.cs:**
```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using Traceability;

[ApiController]
[Route("api/[controller]")]
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    [HttpGet]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id is automatically available
        var correlationId = CorrelationContext.Current;
        return Ok(new { CorrelationId = correlationId });
    }
}
```

## Testing

**Request:**
```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:5000/api/values
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "correlationId": "a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab"
}
```

**Response headers:**
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
X-Correlation-Id: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
```

## Request with Existing Correlation-ID

If you send a request with the `X-Correlation-Id` header, the middleware reuses the value:

**Request:**
```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:5000/api/values \
  -H "X-Correlation-Id: 12345678901234567890123456789012"
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "correlationId": "12345678901234567890123456789012"
}
```

The same correlation-id is returned, ensuring traceability in the chain.

## Example with Logging

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
builder.Logging.AddConsole(options => options.IncludeScopes = true);
```

**Controller:**
```csharp
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly ILogger<ValuesController> _logger;

    public ValuesController(ILogger<ValuesController> logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [HttpGet]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id appears automatically in logs
        _logger.LogInformation("Processing request");
        return Ok();
    }
}
```

**Log output:**
```
info: MyApp.ValuesController[0]
      => CorrelationId: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
      Processing request
```

## Example with HttpClient

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
// HttpClient is already automatically configured!
builder.Services.AddHttpClient("ExternalApi", client =>
{
    client.BaseAddress = new Uri("https://api.example.com/");
});
```

**Controller:**
```csharp
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly IHttpClientFactory _httpClientFactory;

    public ValuesController(IHttpClientFactory httpClientFactory)
    {
        _httpClientFactory = httpClientFactory;
    }

    [HttpGet]
    public async Task<IActionResult> Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id is automatically added to header
        var client = _httpClientFactory.CreateClient("ExternalApi");
        var response = await client.GetAsync("endpoint");
        return Ok(await response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync());
    }
}
```

The external HTTP request automatically includes the header:
```
X-Correlation-Id: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
```

## Disable Auto-Registration (Advanced)

If you need manual control over middleware order:

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService", options =>
{
    options.AutoRegisterMiddleware = false;
});

var app = builder.Build();
app.UseCorrelationId(); // Manual registration
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

## Next Steps

Now that you know how to integrate with ASP.NET Core, let's see how to do the same with .NET Framework in [Lesson 5: ASP.NET Framework](05-aspnet-framework.md), or skip to [Lesson 6: Logging](06-logging.md) if you only use .NET 8.

Commit message:

Fix critical bugs, add OpenTelemetry support, and improve .NET 4.8 compatibility (#23)
* fix: Fix critical bugs and improve performance

- Fix ContinueWith in CorrelationIdHandler to capture Activity before continuation
- Store Activity in HttpContext.Items for CorrelationIdHttpModule to ensure same Activity is used
- Implement robust fallback for ActivityIdFormat supporting both W3C and Hierarchical formats
- Optimize Activity.Current reads by caching in local variable
- Fix thread-safety of _options by using local variable reads
- Improve correlation-id validation to check for invalid characters
- Fix header processing order to ensure header trace-id has priority over Activity

Fixes issues with .NET 4.8 compatibility and ensures proper trace-id propagation across service chains.

* feat: Add OpenTelemetry ActivitySource support

- Add TraceabilityActivitySource for creating Activities (spans)
- Support both .NET 4.8 and .NET 8.0
- Create Activities automatically when OpenTelemetry is not configured
- Propagate W3C Trace Context headers (traceparent, tracestate)
- Add tests for OpenTelemetry integration

* test: Add tests for ActivityIdFormat fallback and .NET 4.8 compatibility

- Add tests for hierarchical format support
- Add tests for ActivityIdFormat changes
- Verify compatibility with both W3C and Hierarchical formats

* docs: Add documentation for trace-id propagation, spans, and observability integration

- Add trace-id-propagation.md: Explains how trace-id propagates between services
- Add spans-and-trace-hierarchy.md: Explains span hierarchy and W3C Trace Context
- Add observability-integration.md: Explains integration with Grafana, Jaeger, and other tools

All documentation is in English.

* docs: Update existing documentation for OpenTelemetry integration

- Update architecture and components documentation
- Update examples and user guides
- Update design decisions and rules
- Update README with OpenTelemetry features

docs/user-guide/04-aspnet-core.md, after:

# Lesson 4: ASP.NET Core

In this lesson, you'll learn to integrate Traceability with ASP.NET Core (.NET 8).

## Basic Configuration

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
using Traceability.Extensions;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

**What happens automatically:**
- ✅ Middleware is automatically registered via `IStartupFilter`
- ✅ OpenTelemetry Activity (span) is automatically created for each request
- ✅ HttpClient is automatically configured with `CorrelationIdHandler`
- ✅ Correlation-id/trace-id is automatically generated for each request
- ✅ W3C Trace Context headers are automatically propagated in HTTP calls

## Using in a Controller

**ValuesController.cs:**
```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using Traceability;

[ApiController]
[Route("api/[controller]")]
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    [HttpGet]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id is automatically available
        var correlationId = CorrelationContext.Current;
        return Ok(new { CorrelationId = correlationId });
    }
}
```

## Testing

**Request:**
```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:5000/api/values
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "correlationId": "a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab"
}
```

**Response headers:**
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
X-Correlation-Id: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
```

## Request with Existing Correlation-ID

If you send a request with the `X-Correlation-Id` header, the middleware reuses the value:

**Request:**
```bash
curl -X GET http://localhost:5000/api/values \
  -H "X-Correlation-Id: 12345678901234567890123456789012"
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "correlationId": "12345678901234567890123456789012"
}
```

The same correlation-id is returned, ensuring traceability in the chain.

## Example with Logging

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
builder.Logging.AddConsole(options => options.IncludeScopes = true);
```

**Controller:**
```csharp
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly ILogger<ValuesController> _logger;

    public ValuesController(ILogger<ValuesController> logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [HttpGet]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id appears automatically in logs
        _logger.LogInformation("Processing request");
        return Ok();
    }
}
```

**Log output:**
```
info: MyApp.ValuesController[0]
      => CorrelationId: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
      Processing request
```

## Example with HttpClient

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService");
// HttpClient is already automatically configured!
builder.Services.AddHttpClient("ExternalApi", client =>
{
    client.BaseAddress = new Uri("https://api.example.com/");
});
```

**Controller:**
```csharp
public class ValuesController : ControllerBase
{
    private readonly IHttpClientFactory _httpClientFactory;

    public ValuesController(IHttpClientFactory httpClientFactory)
    {
        _httpClientFactory = httpClientFactory;
    }

    [HttpGet]
    public async Task<IActionResult> Get()
    {
        // Correlation-id is automatically added to header
        var client = _httpClientFactory.CreateClient("ExternalApi");
        var response = await client.GetAsync("endpoint");
        return Ok(await response.Content.ReadAsStringAsync());
    }
}
```

The external HTTP request automatically includes the headers:
```
X-Correlation-Id: a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab
traceparent: 00-a1b2c3d4e5f6789012345678901234ab-...
```

**Note**: The `traceparent` header is the W3C Trace Context standard for distributed tracing. It's automatically added along with `X-Correlation-Id` for backward compatibility.

## Disable Auto-Registration (Advanced)

If you need manual control over middleware order:

**Program.cs:**
```csharp
builder.Services.AddTraceability("UserService", options =>
{
    options.AutoRegisterMiddleware = false;
});

var app = builder.Build();
app.UseCorrelationId(); // Manual registration
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

## OpenTelemetry Integration

Traceability automatically creates OpenTelemetry Activities (spans) for distributed tracing:

- **Automatic Activity Creation**: If OpenTelemetry SDK is not configured, Traceability creates Activities automatically
- **Hierarchical Spans**: Each HTTP call creates a child span, maintaining trace hierarchy
- **W3C Trace Context**: Automatically propagates `traceparent` and `tracestate` headers
- **Observability Tools**: Compatible with Jaeger, Zipkin, Application Insights, and other OpenTelemetry-compatible tools

**When OpenTelemetry SDK is configured**: Traceability uses existing Activities created by the SDK.

**When OpenTelemetry SDK is not configured**: Traceability creates Activities automatically, ready for future OpenTelemetry integration.

## Next Steps

Now that you know how to integrate with ASP.NET Core, let's see how to do the same with .NET Framework in [Lesson 5: ASP.NET Framework](05-aspnet-framework.md), or skip to [Lesson 6: Logging](06-logging.md) if you only use .NET 8.
