docs/index.md, before:

# Traceability Documentation

Welcome to the complete documentation for the Traceability package for automatic correlation-id management in .NET applications.

## Quick Start

- [Quick Start](getting-started.md) - Get started in minutes
- [Installation](installation.md) - How to install the package

## Guides

- [User Manual](user-guide/index.md) - Progressive guide for beginners
- [Configuration](configuration.md) - Detailed configuration options
- [API Reference](api-reference.md) - Complete API documentation
- [Advanced Topics](advanced.md) - Advanced features and use cases

## Examples

- [ASP.NET Core](examples/aspnet-core.md) - Examples for .NET 8
- [ASP.NET Framework](examples/aspnet-framework.md) - Examples for .NET Framework 4.8
- [Console Application](examples/console.md) - Examples for console applications
- [HTTP Requests](examples/http-requests.md) - HTTP request examples

## Support

- [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md) - Common problem solutions
- [FAQ](troubleshooting.md#faq) - Frequently asked questions
- [DeepWiki (Devin) - Indexed repository documentation](https://deepwiki.com/whitebeardit/traceability)

## Technical Documentation

For developers who want to contribute or understand the internal architecture:

- [CI/CD and Releases](development/ci-cd.md) - CI/CD pipeline and release process
- [Documentation for LLMs](../AGENTS.md) - Complete architecture and technical guide

## What is Traceability?

Traceability is a NuGet package that automatically manages correlation-id in .NET applications, allowing you to track requests across multiple services in distributed architectures.

### Key Features

- ✅ **Zero-code/Zero-config**: Works automatically - just install the package!
- ✅ Automatic correlation-id management using `AsyncLocal`
- ✅ Support for .NET 8.0 and .NET Framework 4.8
- ✅ **Zero-code for .NET Framework 4.8**: Automatic registration via `PreApplicationStartMethod`
- ✅ **Zero-config for .NET 8.0**: Automatic middleware and HttpClient registration
- ✅ Automatic OpenTelemetry Activities (spans) creation
- ✅ Automatic span naming using route templates (e.g., `GET api/values/{id}`)
- ✅ Middleware for ASP.NET Core (.NET 8)
- ✅ HttpModule and MessageHandler for ASP.NET (.NET Framework 4.8)
- ✅ Automatic integration with HttpClient
- ✅ Support for Serilog and Microsoft.Extensions.Logging
- ✅ Integration with Polly for resilience policies
- ✅ Automatic propagation in chained HTTP calls

### When to Use?

Use Traceability when you need:

1. **Microservices Traceability**: Track a request across multiple services
2. **Simplified Debugging**: Quickly identify all logs related to a request
3. **Performance Analysis**: Measure total processing time across multiple services
4. **Monitoring and Observability**: Correlate metrics, traces, and logs from different services

## Supported Frameworks

- **.NET 8.0**: Full support for ASP.NET Core
- **.NET Framework 4.8**: Support for ASP.NET Web API and Traditional ASP.NET

## Quick Installation

```bash
dotnet add package WhiteBeard.Traceability
```

For more details, see [Installation](installation.md).

## Quick Examples

### ASP.NET Core (.NET 8) - Zero Config

```csharp
using Traceability.Extensions;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

// Zero configuration - everything is automatic!
builder.Services.AddTraceability("MyService");
builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

### ASP.NET Framework 4.8 - Zero Code

**Just install the package - that's it!**

```bash
Install-Package WhiteBeard.Traceability
```

No code needed! The library automatically:
- ✅ Registers `CorrelationIdHttpModule` via `PreApplicationStartMethod`
- ✅ Initializes `ActivityListener` for OpenTelemetry spans
- ✅ Creates Activities (spans) for each HTTP request
- ✅ Names spans using route templates

**Optional: Configure Serilog**
```csharp
// Global.asax.cs
Log.Logger = new LoggerConfiguration()
    .WithTraceability("MyService")
    .WriteTo.Console()
    .CreateLogger();
```

For more examples, see [Quick Start](getting-started.md) or the [User Manual](user-guide/index.md).

Commit message:

feat(build): add netstandard2.0 target framework support (#34)
* feat(build): add netstandard2.0 target framework

* feat(core): enable netstandard2.0 compilation for httpclient and opentelemetry

* test(core): add netstandard2.0 compile validation project

* docs(api): update framework support matrix for netstandard2.0

docs/index.md, after:

# Traceability Documentation

Welcome to the complete documentation for the Traceability package for automatic correlation-id management in .NET applications.

## Quick Start

- [Quick Start](getting-started.md) - Get started in minutes
- [Installation](installation.md) - How to install the package

## Guides

- [User Manual](user-guide/index.md) - Progressive guide for beginners
- [Configuration](configuration.md) - Detailed configuration options
- [API Reference](api-reference.md) - Complete API documentation
- [Advanced Topics](advanced.md) - Advanced features and use cases

## Examples

- [ASP.NET Core](examples/aspnet-core.md) - Examples for .NET 8
- [ASP.NET Framework](examples/aspnet-framework.md) - Examples for .NET Framework 4.8
- [Console Application](examples/console.md) - Examples for console applications
- [HTTP Requests](examples/http-requests.md) - HTTP request examples

## Support

- [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md) - Common problem solutions
- [FAQ](troubleshooting.md#faq) - Frequently asked questions
- [DeepWiki (Devin) - Indexed repository documentation](https://deepwiki.com/whitebeardit/traceability)

## Technical Documentation

For developers who want to contribute or understand the internal architecture:

- [CI/CD and Releases](development/ci-cd.md) - CI/CD pipeline and release process
- [Documentation for LLMs](../AGENTS.md) - Complete architecture and technical guide

## What is Traceability?

Traceability is a NuGet package that automatically manages correlation-id in .NET applications, allowing you to track requests across multiple services in distributed architectures.

### Key Features

- ✅ **Zero-code/Zero-config**: Works automatically - just install the package!
- ✅ Automatic correlation-id management using `AsyncLocal`
- ✅ **Portable core** via .NET Standard 2.0 (works with .NET 6, 7, 8, and compatible frameworks)
- ✅ **Full support for .NET 8.0** (ASP.NET Core with automatic middleware registration)
- ✅ **Full support for .NET Framework 4.8+** (ASP.NET Web API and Traditional ASP.NET with automatic HttpModule registration)
- ✅ **Zero-code for .NET Framework 4.8**: Automatic registration via `PreApplicationStartMethod`
- ✅ **Zero-config for .NET 8.0**: Automatic middleware and HttpClient registration
- ✅ Automatic OpenTelemetry Activities (spans) creation
- ✅ Automatic span naming using route templates (e.g., `GET api/values/{id}`)
- ✅ Middleware for ASP.NET Core (.NET 8)
- ✅ HttpModule and MessageHandler for ASP.NET (.NET Framework 4.8)
- ✅ Automatic integration with HttpClient
- ✅ Support for Serilog and Microsoft.Extensions.Logging
- ✅ Integration with Polly for resilience policies
- ✅ Automatic propagation in chained HTTP calls

### When to Use?

Use Traceability when you need:

1. **Microservices Traceability**: Track a request across multiple services
2. **Simplified Debugging**: Quickly identify all logs related to a request
3. **Performance Analysis**: Measure total processing time across multiple services
4. **Monitoring and Observability**: Correlate metrics, traces, and logs from different services

## Supported Frameworks

The package uses **multi-targeting** to provide optimal support for each platform:

- **.NET Standard 2.0**: Portable core library (CorrelationContext, HttpClient, Logging, Configuration)
  - Compatible with .NET 6, 7, 8, .NET Framework 4.6.1+, and other .NET Standard 2.0 implementations
- **.NET 8.0**: Full ASP.NET Core integration with automatic middleware registration
- **.NET Framework 4.8+**: Full ASP.NET Framework integration with automatic HttpModule registration

The package automatically selects the appropriate implementation based on your target framework.

## Quick Installation

```bash
dotnet add package WhiteBeard.Traceability
```

For more details, see [Installation](installation.md).

## Quick Examples

### ASP.NET Core (.NET 8) - Zero Config

```csharp
using Traceability.Extensions;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

// Zero configuration - everything is automatic!
builder.Services.AddTraceability("MyService");
builder.Services.AddControllers();

var app = builder.Build();
app.MapControllers();
app.Run();
```

### ASP.NET Framework 4.8 - Zero Code

**Just install the package - that's it!**

```bash
Install-Package WhiteBeard.Traceability
```

No code needed! The library automatically:
- ✅ Registers `CorrelationIdHttpModule` via `PreApplicationStartMethod`
- ✅ Initializes `ActivityListener` for OpenTelemetry spans
- ✅ Creates Activities (spans) for each HTTP request
- ✅ Names spans using route templates

**Optional: Configure Serilog**
```csharp
// Global.asax.cs
Log.Logger = new LoggerConfiguration()
    .WithTraceability("MyService")
    .WriteTo.Console()
    .CreateLogger();
```

For more examples, see [Quick Start](getting-started.md) or the [User Manual](user-guide/index.md).
