docs/verification-report.md, before:

# Verification Report: Documentation vs Implementation

**Date**: 2024-12-19
**Objective**: Verify if the documentation is consistent with the implemented code

## Executive Summary

The documentation is **mostly correct**, but some **discrepancies** were found that should be corrected to maintain accuracy.

## Discrepancies Found

### 1. ✅ DISCREPANCY: `AddTraceability` Overloads

**Location**: `docs/agents/components.md` (lines 613-622)

**Documentation says**:
```csharp
// Overload 1: Configuration via Action (Source can come from options or env var)
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null);

// Overload 2: Configuration with direct Source (optional - can come from env var)
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    string? source = null,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null);
```

**Implemented code**:
```csharp
// Only ONE overload with both optional parameters
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    string? source = null,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null)
```

**Impact**: Low - Functionally equivalent, but the documentation suggests two overloads when there is only one.

**Recommendation**: Update the documentation to reflect that there is only one overload with optional parameters, or add the missing overload to the code.

---

### 2. ✅ DISCREPANCY: OpenTelemetry propagation and span defaults

Some documentation pages previously stated that Traceability propagates both `traceparent` and `tracestate`, and that HttpClient spans are always created on .NET 8.

**Implemented behavior**:

- Traceability **propagates `traceparent`** when trace context is available.
- Traceability **does not explicitly emit `tracestate`**.
- On **.NET 8**, Traceability-created HttpClient spans are **opt-in** via `TraceabilityOptions.Net8HttpClientSpansEnabled` or `TRACEABILITY_NET8_HTTPCLIENT_SPANS_ENABLED=true`.

**Recommendation**: Keep documentation consistent with the current implementation and clearly distinguish Traceability behavior from OpenTelemetry SDK/instrumentation behavior.

### 2. ✅ VERIFIED: `MinimumLogLevel` exists

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documentation mentions `TraceabilityOptions.MinimumLogLevel` and the code implements it correctly:
- Property exists in `TraceabilityOptions.cs` (line 131)
- It's used in `LoggerConfigurationExtensions.cs` (method `GetMinimumLogLevel`)
- Configuration priority is correct: Env Var > Options > Default

---

### 3. ✅ VERIFIED: Directory structure

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The directory structure documented in `docs/agents/patterns.md` exactly matches the actual project structure.

---

### 4. ✅ VERIFIED: Core Components

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

All components mentioned in the documentation exist and are implemented:
- ✅ `CorrelationContext` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdMiddleware` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdMessageHandler` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdHttpModule` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdHandler` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceableHttpClientFactory` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdEnricher` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `SourceEnricher` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `DataEnricher` - Correctly implemented (mentioned in doc)
- ✅ `JsonFormatter` - Correctly implemented (mentioned in doc)
- ✅ `CorrelationIdScopeProvider` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `SourceScopeProvider` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceabilityUtilities` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceabilityOptions` - Correctly implemented

---

### 5. ✅ VERIFIED: `TraceabilityOptions` Properties

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

All documented properties exist in the code:
- ✅ `HeaderName`
- ✅ `AlwaysGenerateNew`
- ✅ `ValidateCorrelationIdFormat`
- ✅ `Source`
- ✅ `LogOutputFormat`
- ✅ `LogIncludeTimestamp`
- ✅ `LogIncludeLevel`
- ✅ `LogIncludeSource`
- ✅ `LogIncludeCorrelationId`
- ✅ `LogIncludeMessage`
- ✅ `LogIncludeData`
- ✅ `LogIncludeException`
- ✅ `MinimumLogLevel` (recently added)
- ✅ `AutoRegisterMiddleware`
- ✅ `AutoConfigureHttpClient`
- ✅ `UseAssemblyNameAsFallback`

---

### 6. ✅ VERIFIED: Described Behaviors

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The behaviors described in the documentation match the code:
- ✅ GUID generation without hyphens (`ToString("N")`)
- ✅ Use of `AsyncLocal<string>` for isolation
- ✅ Default header `X-Correlation-Id`
- ✅ Don't modify existing correlation-id
- ✅ Format validation when enabled
- ✅ Source priority: Parameter > Options > Env Var > Assembly Name
- ✅ Automatic Source sanitization
- ✅ Auto-registration of middleware via `IStartupFilter`
- ✅ Auto-configuration of HttpClient

---

### 7. ✅ VERIFIED: LoggerConfiguration Extensions

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documented methods exist and work correctly:
- ✅ `WithTraceability(string? source = null)`
- ✅ `WithTraceabilityJson(string? source = null, Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null)`
- ✅ `WithTraceabilityJson(TraceabilityOptions options)`

---

### 8. ✅ VERIFIED: Conditional Compilation

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documentation about conditional compilation is correct:
- ✅ `#if NET8_0` used for ASP.NET Core code
- ✅ `#if NET48` used for .NET Framework code
- ✅ Common code without directives works in both

---

### 9. ✅ VERIFIED: Flows and Diagrams

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The flows described in the Mermaid diagrams match the implementation:
- ✅ ASP.NET Core request flow
- ✅ .NET Framework request flow
- ✅ Propagation in chained HTTP calls
- ✅ Logging integration

---

## Recommendations

### High Priority

1. ✅ **COMPLETED**: **Fix overload documentation**: Updated `docs/agents/components.md` to reflect that `AddTraceability` has only one overload with optional parameters, not two separate overloads.

### Low Priority

1. **Consider adding missing overload**: If the original intention was to have two separate overloads, consider adding the overload that accepts only `Action<TraceabilityOptions>` to improve API clarity.

---

## Conclusion

The documentation is **95% correct** and well aligned with the implementation. The only significant discrepancy is the mention of two `AddTraceability` overloads when there is only one (with optional parameters).

**Overall Status**: ✅ **APPROVED - CORRECTIONS APPLIED**

---

## Validation Checklist

- [x] Directory structure matches
- [x] Mentioned components exist
- [x] Documented properties exist
- [x] Documented methods exist
- [x] Described behaviors match
- [x] Conditional compilation is correct
- [x] Flows and diagrams are correct
- [x] **COMPLETED**: Fix overload documentation

Commit message:

refactor(traceability)!: remove internal OpenTelemetry and span creation (#35)
* refactor(core): remove internal otel instrumentation and span creation

* test(tests): remove otel tests and disable parallel execution

* docs(docs): align docs with external tracing model

* docs(samples): update samples to enrich logs with trace context

* chore(repo): ignore vscode workspace settings

* docs(migration)!: document migration to external tracing

BREAKING CHANGE: Traceability no longer provides internal OpenTelemetry auto-instrumentation or automatic span (Activity) creation; tracing must be configured externally.

docs/verification-report.md, after:

# Verification Report: Documentation vs Implementation

**Date**: 2024-12-19
**Objective**: Verify if the documentation is consistent with the implemented code

## Executive Summary

The documentation is **mostly correct**, but some **discrepancies** were found that should be corrected to maintain accuracy.

## Discrepancies Found

### 1. ✅ DISCREPANCY: `AddTraceability` Overloads

**Location**: `docs/agents/components.md` (lines 613-622)

**Documentation says**:
```csharp
// Overload 1: Configuration via Action (Source can come from options or env var)
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null);

// Overload 2: Configuration with direct Source (optional - can come from env var)
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    string? source = null,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null);
```

**Implemented code**:
```csharp
// Only ONE overload with both optional parameters
public static IServiceCollection AddTraceability(
    this IServiceCollection services,
    string? source = null,
    Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null)
```

**Impact**: Low - Functionally equivalent, but the documentation suggests two overloads when there is only one.

**Recommendation**: Update the documentation to reflect that there is only one overload with optional parameters, or add the missing overload to the code.

---

### 2. ✅ DISCREPANCY: OpenTelemetry propagation and span defaults

Some documentation pages previously stated that Traceability propagates both `traceparent` and `tracestate`, and that HttpClient spans are always created on .NET 8.

**Implemented behavior**:

- Traceability **propagates `traceparent`** when trace context is available.
- Traceability **does not explicitly emit `tracestate`**.
- Traceability **does not create spans**; OpenTelemetry instrumentation/exporters must be configured in the application.

**Recommendation**: Keep documentation consistent with the current implementation and clearly distinguish Traceability behavior from OpenTelemetry SDK/instrumentation behavior.

### 2. ✅ VERIFIED: `MinimumLogLevel` exists

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documentation mentions `TraceabilityOptions.MinimumLogLevel` and the code implements it correctly:
- Property exists in `TraceabilityOptions.cs` (line 131)
- It's used in `LoggerConfigurationExtensions.cs` (method `GetMinimumLogLevel`)
- Configuration priority is correct: Env Var > Options > Default

---

### 3. ✅ VERIFIED: Directory structure

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The directory structure documented in `docs/agents/patterns.md` exactly matches the actual project structure.

---

### 4. ✅ VERIFIED: Core Components

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

All components mentioned in the documentation exist and are implemented:
- ✅ `CorrelationContext` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdMiddleware` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdMessageHandler` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdHttpModule` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdHandler` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceableHttpClientFactory` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `CorrelationIdEnricher` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `SourceEnricher` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `DataEnricher` - Correctly implemented (mentioned in doc)
- ✅ `JsonFormatter` - Correctly implemented (mentioned in doc)
- ✅ `CorrelationIdScopeProvider` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `SourceScopeProvider` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceabilityUtilities` - Correctly implemented
- ✅ `TraceabilityOptions` - Correctly implemented

---

### 5. ✅ VERIFIED: `TraceabilityOptions` Properties

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

All documented properties exist in the code:
- ✅ `HeaderName`
- ✅ `AlwaysGenerateNew`
- ✅ `ValidateCorrelationIdFormat`
- ✅ `Source`
- ✅ `LogOutputFormat`
- ✅ `LogIncludeTimestamp`
- ✅ `LogIncludeLevel`
- ✅ `LogIncludeSource`
- ✅ `LogIncludeCorrelationId`
- ✅ `LogIncludeMessage`
- ✅ `LogIncludeData`
- ✅ `LogIncludeException`
- ✅ `MinimumLogLevel` (recently added)
- ✅ `AutoRegisterMiddleware`
- ✅ `AutoConfigureHttpClient`
- ✅ `UseAssemblyNameAsFallback`

---

### 6. ✅ VERIFIED: Described Behaviors

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The behaviors described in the documentation match the code:
- ✅ GUID generation without hyphens (`ToString("N")`)
- ✅ Use of `AsyncLocal<string>` for isolation
- ✅ Default header `X-Correlation-Id`
- ✅ Don't modify existing correlation-id
- ✅ Format validation when enabled
- ✅ Source priority: Parameter > Options > Env Var > Assembly Name
- ✅ Automatic Source sanitization
- ✅ Auto-registration of middleware via `IStartupFilter`
- ✅ Auto-configuration of HttpClient

---

### 7. ✅ VERIFIED: LoggerConfiguration Extensions

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documented methods exist and work correctly:
- ✅ `WithTraceability(string? source = null)`
- ✅ `WithTraceabilityJson(string? source = null, Action<TraceabilityOptions>? configureOptions = null)`
- ✅ `WithTraceabilityJson(TraceabilityOptions options)`

---

### 8. ✅ VERIFIED: Conditional Compilation

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The documentation about conditional compilation is correct:
- ✅ `#if NET8_0` used for ASP.NET Core code
- ✅ `#if NET48` used for .NET Framework code
- ✅ Common code without directives works in both

---

### 9. ✅ VERIFIED: Flows and Diagrams

**Status**: ✅ **CORRECT**

The flows described in the Mermaid diagrams match the implementation:
- ✅ ASP.NET Core request flow
- ✅ .NET Framework request flow
- ✅ Propagation in chained HTTP calls
- ✅ Logging integration

---

## Recommendations

### High Priority

1. ✅ **COMPLETED**: **Fix overload documentation**: Updated `docs/agents/components.md` to reflect that `AddTraceability` has only one overload with optional parameters, not two separate overloads.

### Low Priority

1. **Consider adding missing overload**: If the original intention was to have two separate overloads, consider adding the overload that accepts only `Action<TraceabilityOptions>` to improve API clarity.

---

## Conclusion

The documentation is **95% correct** and well aligned with the implementation. The only significant discrepancy is the mention of two `AddTraceability` overloads when there is only one (with optional parameters).

**Overall Status**: ✅ **APPROVED - CORRECTIONS APPLIED**

---

## Validation Checklist

- [x] Directory structure matches
- [x] Mentioned components exist
- [x] Documented properties exist
- [x] Documented methods exist
- [x] Described behaviors match
- [x] Conditional compilation is correct
- [x] Flows and diagrams are correct
- [x] **COMPLETED**: Fix overload documentation
